# Lava twitter spaces. Building Lava - The SDK.
 U1 
 0:00 
 62s Hello. 17s Hello. 2s Hey, how's it going? 1s All 
 U2 
 1:26 
 good. 
 U1 
 1:29 
 Good to have you on the call. 
 U3 
 1:33 
 Good to be here. 
 U2 
 4:04 
 Welcome, everybody who's joined already. We're just taking a second here to get ourselves together. We'll go ahead and get started. Hope everyone's having a wonderful day. We look forward to discussing this building, Lava the SDK with you special Twitter space that will give us insight directly from some of the engineers who worked on the SDK and have been working continuously it's never a past tense thing. Continuously working on the SDK where we can hear a little bit about what went into it and a little bit more about it. So we just want to thank everybody for joining. 1s I do want to say that this is an interactive session. We are welcoming you all to request to speak if you have questions or to, of course, tweet against this thread. If you have something that you want to put in the tweet thread, we can always respond to it here on this space. But it is an opportunity for the community, for you all, to learn a little bit more about Lava the SDK and the engineers behind it. 
 U1 
 5:25 
 I love seeing some of our dedicated providers in this call. Welcome, guys. 
 U2 
 5:34 
 You. 
 U1 
 5:36 
 It's been beautiful to see just the amount of support that we get from our community in general. We have a very active community on Twitter, and you see them definitely on Discord. People completing the zeali. People participating on Discord. I don't know if you've seen this before, Omar, but our leaderboard on Zeali, I think top person, completed 68 Quests and gathered 19,000 XP. So we got some Lava Fanatics, is what I'm telling you. 
 U3 
 6:12 
 Leave some room for me, guys. 3s So while we're waiting for one of our other engineers to join, we're going to go ahead and get started. We welcome everybody to this Twitter space. Of course, the title is building lava the SDK. The focus of this is learning a little bit more about the SDK. But before we jump into that, want to introduce Lava. For those who don't know, Lava is open source and community led. It is a decentralized RPC for all of Web Three, the network of node runners, each incentivized to give you fast, reliable and accurate RPC. Me. This is a really exciting opportunity to talk about the SDK, which has been under construction for a while. And I have to admit there's a lot of anticipation around what goes into the SDK. So 
 U1 
 7:04 
 we'll start by asking, 1s what is Lava SDK? And the Lava SDK really 1s is plug and play access to the public decentralized RPC from your browser or back end. Right now, it's supportive of the back end, and it's fully open source on its own. GitHub repository. You can look on Lava's GitHub repository. It's available for download using Node package Manager. Using Lava SDK, a developer can access any of the chains supported on Lava over multiple protocols. That includes JSON, Rest, gRPC and even others with only a few lines of code. So if you're unfamiliar with Lava SDK, this is your chance to get to know a little bit more about it and some of the engineers behind it. Right now, we have Omer here speaking with us. He has quite the nice handle there. And we will be joined shortly by Alexa, another engineer who has helped and assisted in building the SDK. 2s One of the questions that we frequently get asked is, okay, how's it different from other RPCs related SDKs? The main thing that any listener should learn about Lava SDK is that it provides peer to peer decentralized access. Lava SDK has an automated pairing functionality, chain agnostic interfaces, multi chain support, multi protocol support, built in concurrency and subscriptions, as well as integrations with popular libraries like cosm JS. I'm sorry, not Cosm JS yet. Coming soon. Ethers JS the peer to peer security is one of the distinguishing features allowing decentralized access for RPC across all different chains and architectures. So it's an exciting thing to talk about. I'm really, really excited to talk about the benefits that come with that. The reliability, the privacy, the censorship resistance. All of these are web three values. All of these are necessary for the next evolution of the Web. So at a high level, it allows a developer to use no URLs. Simple methods, simple interface. But I want to ask more at a somewhat lower level, directed to omer. How does the lava SDK communicate with lava? 
 U2 
 9:29 
 Hello? Guys, Omar here. So Lava SDK is implementing the Lava protocol 
 U3 
 9:37 
 and it's wrapping around your request for the various API interfaces we support within gRPC web. Now, in order to communicate with the Lava blockchain, the SDK is using a solution that is inspired from seed Notes where it gets a list of possible accountable providers for the Lava pairing mechanism. And once it's onboarded on the current blockchain state in a decentralized manner that is also comparable and those providers have a longer lockup period so they cannot lie to consumers using the SDK. 1s Then the SDK is synced on the Lava blockchain and it can track then the pairing the consumer is getting on the wanted service, for example Osmosis or Ethereum. So the SDK is then getting its pairing on Osmosis. In that pairing there is the pre state providers endpoints for direct communication. So by using those providers to sync on chain verify those results, it's getting the endpoints for Osmosis and then it communicates within the Lava protocol protobuffs all the communication that supported in Osmosis, for example Osmosis gRPC for walls is wrapped within the Lava SDK and then sent directly to an Osmosis provider. And that Osmosis provider doesn't even run a Lava node himself. 
 U1 
 11:20 
 Wow. So let's back up for 1 second and ask this question from the standard developer experience that we have. A developer today wants to build a DAP. They want to build a service. They take a URL, they plug it into their app, they plug it into their command line tool that they're using. How does Lava SDK manage to give you this access to this network without using the URL? Okay, great. So instead of using the URL, the Lava SDK can get the list of seed notes. It's an address book format for possible peers. That list of peers is updating very rarely, and most of them will still be accountable. And once they're not, it's pretty easy for the infrastructure to refresh that. That list can be either fetched from GitHub, from Lava's centralized public RPC, or from the back end of the DAP, or altogether and compared so you have multiple sources. And each developer can get his own decentralized address book like he would for any node running he does. And it's a very lightweight seed information the decentralized SDK is using, and then it onboards the entire blockchain. And from there, once you have that initial point, that is not single point of trust, but multi points of trust, but that initial seed file, then 
 U2 
 12:50 
 everything from there is automatic within the SDK. 
 U1 
 12:55 
 So it sounds like we have a built in solution here for decentralization. Can you speak a little bit to that? And Alexa, who has just joined us, has speaking privileges now. I want to welcome you to the call and feel free to jump in on this answer as well. 
 U2 
 13:13 
 Cool. Hey guys. So I'm one of engineers who worked on SDK and thanks, it's great question. So the whole point of Lava is decentralization. So of course the SDK, when we started building the SDK, the idea was to utilize everything that we created in Lava to also provide a decentralized access. So, as Omar already explained a lot of things, so I'll just recap. So basically the idea is that whoever is using the SDK, he wants to talk with specific network. And we in Lava, we are enabling that talk. And from user perspective, it's almost the same as talking to centralized. You just initialize SDK and send a request and the whole decentralization is happening behind the scenes. So basically, as we already explained, you first using multiple providers. You talk with Lava network to get the providers to the network. You want to request to send request, and then you just pick one of these providers, send request, get response, and then we have different mechanisms of verifying that it's true and it's honest and it's really fast. So that's basically how we manage to have the whole decentralization. 
 U3 
 14:23 
 You and how did we come up with this solution? Because it seems quite the challenge and actually a really clever, clever way. Listening to the description of the seed providers pulling in the other ones, I'm just curious how do we come up, how do we solve this issue? Well, generally the whole SDK was built after we had everything, 2s all the core features of the Lava. So building the SDK was not that hard when you have all of that already implemented. So we utilized the Lava network, we utilized the providers and our goal was to have the similar experience as for our consumers have. And Lava over Lava is, I think, the great showcase how we are for real trying to achieve the complete decentralization. Because this was when we created the SDK. Initially we used centralized Lava endpoint, but then we learned that we cannot use a centralized endpoint. And then we started thinking how we can utilize what we already have. And we learned that talking with Lava is generally the same as talking with any other network which is supported by Lava. So we can use the whole system which we already have for talking with, for example, ethereum, cosmos and so on, but just use it to talk with Lava network. And in that way we are reusing something that we offer to also talk with our train lava train. 1s You. Awesome. 1s What were some of the unique challenges of building this SDK? I'm going to go ahead and address this to Omer. If you can speak to some of the unique challenges that we encountered in this process. 
 U2 
 16:03 
 Sure. Thanks. 
 U1 
 16:05 
 So the first thing that was super hard to tackle was how to get that single point of the first step in initializing the SDK. The idea of using seed nodes came up after drilling hard. How are we not trusting a single point of failure? Because we wanted to build something that's truly decentralized and not semi decentralized or backdoor centralization or supervised. We didn't want that. We wanted a solution that once it matures, it can run on its own by the community, owned by the community. So we wanted to eliminate that server that we have to run forever. Otherwise nothing works. So this is how we came up with the seed inspired solution. Because we asked ourselves, how are other chains that are fully decentralized doing that? How are you syncing on Ethereum? And then we came up with those ideas. The second point that was pretty difficult was the fact that front end running an SDK is fully compromised. And being fully compromised, you cannot hold a secret key and you cannot actually bother the ledger to click for every RPC that's presented. So we have on one hand, we want this to be accountable with cryptographic signatures being done on the SDK, but on the other hand, we don't want to compromise secret peace that even if they're not holding a lot of money, they're holding the consumer subscription, 1s and it's dear to them and they need that for their adapt to work. So that's another trade off that was very difficult for us. And we picked our brains until we came with our future solution about badges. 
 U2 
 17:57 
 And I would say third difficulty working within the SDK in the browser would be the concurrency. We built our server kit the solution that's our gateway based on to be highly concurrent and I think adapting it to browser in a single thread with the capabilities it's another tech stack that we are working on and it's challenging to develop on different text tax one high throughput the other one is flexible and adaptive to all the common development libraries. 4s Understood? Okay, so we had a couple of challenges seems that we overcame or overcoming them right now, I think I wanted to ask Alexa, did you have anything to add on this? Some of the struggles in building the SDK? Yeah, so I think that Omar covered most of the things I would just like to .1 more thing and that's that we want SDK to work both in browser and on server. And our providers, they can listen to gRPC. So we all know that talking from the browser to using gRPC is really hard. So there is something which is relatively new called gRPC Web. But most like how the architecture when someone is using gRPC Web works is you create the centralized proxy and then you send from the browser to the proxy and then proxy relays. That's also something that we didn't want to add because then you would need to either bootstrap your own proxy or you would need to rely on our centralized. What we at the end came up to, we enabled our providers to listen both the gRPC and RPC web. And then when you're using the SDK from the browser, you're sending relays directly to the providers using gRPC Web. And for us, this was something that we spent a lot of time on and we are really proud that we managed to pull this off. 
 U1 
 19:52 
 It's nice. I do want to return to something that Omer mentioned quickly. I know you said badges as a solution. I don't think we've given much of a definition of that here and I was just wondering if we could get a sentence or two about what that is and how that works. 
 U2 
 20:12 
 Yeah, sure. Badges are token, you can look. Is it like JWT for utilizing consumption on a user's subscription? So basically it's a low importance key that can be assumed to be compromised. It's time limited and consumption limited way more than the rate limiting that the consumer needs. And it's generated for the front end by the badge server. It's an authentication server that serves those badges and then the front end can actually directly talk with providers. Providers are getting that badge and they know that they will be paid from the developer's subscription, but without the developer signing, the realtor is themselves. So you have all the mechanisms of the Lava protocol, all the accountability for both sides. 1s And the payments everything with low importance keys that when compromised 1s it's very limited and not worth the trouble 
 U1 
 21:30 
 and so currently the SDK uses a badge server that's run by Lava, is that correct? 
 U2 
 21:38 
 We offer this as onboarding solution. And, you know, for our users using the gateway, it's the easiest way to onboard so they don't have to worry about generating that. And their users within the gateway are automatically given a bad server access. It is centralized. But we are not decentralization fanatics in a way that we will make onboarding lava difficult. We want to offer decentralization for those that are seeking it and those that just want a convenience. Play to do Multichan RPC that they like that they can affect we want Lava to be attractive as well so we are offering that great solution for easy onboarding and it's amazing for development also on production use later on for those that it fits their needs. 
 U3 
 22:31 
 Yeah, I would love to add that anyone would be able to run their own badge server soon, so it should be easy for someone who is pursuing that level of decentralization to host their own badge server, issue the badges and run it that way. Which leads to a point of we're releasing this SDK and alpha. We're still in testnet as Lava, and we're always looking for Devs to contribute, help us build experience, our developer experience, and our flow. So definitely check us out. Think of it as we're releasing this in an early public alpha phase. All of the code is available on GitHub, so you can take a look and see if there's areas that you can improve the SDK or specific feature requests that you want to make, issues you want to point out. Now, the question be, why should Devs join the SDK alpha testing movement? Well, if you're a developer and you really want to improve if you really, really want to improve your use of RPC, you want to improve your depth. Lava SDK is going to be one vehicle for doing that. So our alpha testers input is always welcomed and useful in the construction of the interfaces and tools that you need. The SDK is currently integrated with our gateway, so you can get decentralized access with the simple on our gateway. We can talk a little bit more about that later, but that's just a little bit. Just wanted to go ahead and mention that, but let's get a little deeper into some of these functionalities that Devs can use or should expect. 2s Let's go with Alexa first and talk about. 1s Cosm JS integration. It's something that I think has been hot topic. Some of our developer champions have mentioned it. I think one of them may even be working towards it. Can you speak about this functionality? Sure. So, just to give the background story of how we came up of integrating with different libraries so we are like developer first. So we also are aware that creating a new library is always the people who are already used to different libraries. It's relatively hard to tell them hey, switch. Or if you already have an application, you now need to switch to using the Lava SDK. And we want to make that process of switching and using Lava SDK as easy as possible. And one way of doing it is integrating with existing libraries which are already used in multiple applications. And for example, we already worked on integration with Etherjs. So what we basically our goal is that if someone has an application which is utilizing Etherjs, we want to provide easy switch to Lava SDK. And the way how they can do it is we basically extended the provider. We created Lava Eaters provider and the only thing what the user needs to do, if he already has the application 2s using iterjs, it can just switch the provider and then everything will work. But it will not use the centralized RPC, but it will go over everything we already explained. And Etherjs was the first library where we tested this and we got great feedback. So now of course, we are planning to integrate with other libraries as like Cosmo JS, Web three JS and so on. 
 U1 
 25:50 
 Awesome. And are there some other functionalities or improvements that we should expect? This is directed at Omer. I know there are a number of things down the pipeline that as the Lava SDK goes from this early alpha phase where we're actually doing a public launch, we wanted to make sure that it's robust with features. So can you tease some of those here? 
 U2 
 26:12 
 Yeah, I personally, my personal favorite is Provider picker the provider optimizer. It allows the SDK to query several providers for performance, track the performance, and then pick the best one. So initial queries wouldn't be as good as further usage. So for a site that's interactive or something that runs in the background, it would get better and better as it goes. Obviously the Lava blockchain is going to kick bad providers, but even within good providers, for example, one of your users is located at a certain country in Europe and there's a provider just next door. It would pick that one, even though that the developer registered for 
 U3 
 26:55 
 all of Europe or the entire world. So this is something I'm looking forward to. It's a great add on on performance. Session handling is another great feature. It allows aggregation of sessions, reducing overhead. On the provider side, the SDK is not going to get much better because of it, but it's going to reduce the amount of transaction provider needs to do and increase the profitability of providers, which is good because it will reflect on the pricing and the token. 1s Obviously we're interested now, but we're doing what we can to make it as good as possible, and I think those are the ones that we're pushing towards the strongest. We have also WebSocket subscriptions in mind that we want to integrate into the SDK, 1s and obviously the integration with badges is something big that's happening. Th it's not fully robust yet and it's coming very soon. 
 U1 
 28:01 
 Sounds like we've got a great lineup. Very excited to see what happens as the SDK makes its full public launch. Right now we're in the early preview mode, so for those devs who are extremely interested, definitely reach out to myself, visit our documentation, get on our discord, get involved in our community. There are ways that you can get your hands on the SDK right now and get started, but it is not currently publicly launched, so we will be working towards this, getting some of these features, some of these things ironed out. We're definitely looking for early alpha testers, but I just want to say that if anybody from the community has any questions or anything they'd like to raise, please feel free. Like I said, this is intended to also answer questions and be interactive towards our community so you can request to speak. 2s But are there any other messages that you would like to leave us with Alexa or Omer regarding the SDK, your process of building the SDK and your experience with it as an engineer? 
 U2 
 29:12 
 Let me try that question a little different. Is there anything that you all would like to leave us with, just in terms of a message? As someone who has had your hands on the SDK and been more familiar and intimate with it? Yeah, I can start. So, yeah, now we are in the phase that we are preparing the launch. So, like me, as the engineer who works and develops like the SDK, I would really appreciate whoever wants to test you can ping us and find us literally anywhere. So, yeah, try it place, give us your feedback, 
 U1 
 29:42 
 and yeah, that's it. Thanks. 2s Excellent. Well, thank you, everybody, for attending this building. Lava, the SDK. This has been a wonderful chance to share with you some of the internal machinations that have gone on to make this wonderful SDK tick and talk. So thank you, everybody for attending. Check out our documentation. Speak to me further. If you would like to learn more about how to get involved with the SDK. Check out our discord, check out our website, Lavanet XYZ. We're really excited to be this far along, and the SDK is one of my favorite pet projects if I can choose amongst the children. So I'm very excited for this and I hope everybody else can see. As we mentioned before, Lava is open source and community led. So anyone can propose a new chain or spec to Lava. Anyone can use the SDK, read the open source code, provide feedback, and contribute. We have an incredible community of node runners that support dozens of ecosystems and are contributing to our testnet. I want to say thank you, Omer, and thank you, Alexa, for participating. And thank you all for listening. That's it for now. Take 
 U2 
 30:48 
 care. Thank you so much. 
 U1 
 30:50 
 Thank you, guys. 1s Bye bye. 
